

You might have heard of the STAR method to answer behavioral questions in 
job interviews for various tech companies, most notably Amazon. But you 
can apply its principles to create a great resume that contextualizes your 
achievements and operational capabilities.

At Levels.fyi, we emphasize placing your expertise and years of experience 
within the professional context of working with a team.

Hiring managers no longer want the kind of dull, dry stating of facts that 
most job seekers put in their resumes. They want to see how well you can 
perform, especially under stressful situations.

The STAR approach provides them with an extra reliable measure of future 
performance. But how exactly do you apply the STAR approach to your 
resume? In this article, you'll learn:

    What the STAR method is
    What does STAR stand for?
    How to use the STAR method for your resume
    How to turn your STAR answers into resume-friendly bullet points
    Why use the STAR method for resumes

What Is The STAR Method?

The STAR method is a framework that’s been used to answer behavioral 
questions in job interviews effectively.

Behavioral interview questions are questions on how you've applied your 
skills in a real-world context. When interviewers ask you this type of 
question, they want to see how you react in the face of adversity and 
whether you're a good fit with the team.

Examples of behavioral interview questions include:

    Tell me about a time when someone's report was late, and they weren't 
responsive. How did you go about solving this situation?
    Tell me about a time you've made a mistake. How did you go about this?
    When you were dissatisfied at work, how did you go about continuing 
with your tasks?

But employing the STAR method to your resume can also help the recruiter 
better understand how you've effectively applied your skills to succeed in 
your past work through concrete examples.

What Is The STAR Method
STAR Formula: What Does STAR Stand For?

The STAR acronym stands for situation, task, action, and results. Similar 
to when you're answering behavioral questions, your resume needs to stick 
within this sequence to correctly apply the STAR method.

If done correctly, this can provide a full description of your experience 
and show your value to prospective employers. In the next section, we’ll 
give some sample answers to get you a clearer sense of what each component 
means.
STAR Method Resume: Drafting Your Answers

Let's set the context behind this application. You're applying for a job 
at Stripe for a regional marketing manager role for Western Europe, and 
you consider yourself to be quite a strong candidate. In the past, you 
were head of marketing for Mailjet, an email service provider startup that 
just got acquired by Mailgun.

You want to make sure you'll get the job, so you've decided to apply the 
STAR method to your resume. But what exactly makes a STAR resume?
Situation - What is the context?

The *situation *describes the context surrounding the problem or challenge 
you encountered in the past. Begin by defining the role you held at your 
former employer's company and state the scope of your responsibilities:

As Mailjet's head of marketing operations in the EMEA and USA region, I 
was the direct manager of a multilingual, 10-person marketing team, 
including seven direct reports and two agencies in the USA, France, 
Germany, and Spain.

This response is better suited for a behavioral answer in your job 
interview. However, it can also serve as a great guideline on what to 
include in your resume:

Title of this past work experience: Mailjet - Head of marketing operations 
(EMEA and USA) (June 2016 - July 2019)

Let's keep it like this for now. We'll come back to the rest of the 
content.
Task - What was the relevant task you were responsible for?

The recruiter wants to understand your tasks and responsibilities, 
including why they hired you in the first place. After all, companies hire 
people to make its processes more effective.

Establish your competencies by setting a problem that was happening before 
you arrived. You could particularly mention a task or responsibility 
mentioned in the job post listing:

For this role at Stripe, you must have experience managing a distributed 
marketing team and coordinating multilingual marketing campaign 
initiatives across Germany, France, Spain, and the Netherlands.

A draft of a task statement to this could be:

Before Mailjet hired me, the company lacked cohesion across its global 
marketing campaigns. It didn't have a strategic alignment of their overall 
marketing goals and business development initiatives. They also didn't 
have a consistent way of communicating Mailjet across these different 
regions. I was tasked with finding a better way for our distributed 
marketing team to work together.

The task part explains why this past company has hired you. It also shows 
why your skills are highly relevant for this new role you're applying for.
Action - What did you do to improve the processes?

The action describes the steps you took to address the situation or 
overcome the challenge.

You'll need to showcase your ability to make things happen. Present 
details of the actions you took to manage the issue. Most importantly, 
present your initiatives within the context of working alongside a team:

I led a team effort to restructure our marketing workflows. This included 
setting weekly meetings to align our marketing campaigns. We've begun 
working more closely with the product team to ensure that we develop 
multi-marketing initiatives on product launches and with the sales team to 
repurpose our content assets for sales outreach.
Results - What are the results of your actions?

Did your actions help you to achieve your goal and overcome the challenge? 
What was the lesson you got from experience? What value did this add to 
you and your organization?

You'll want to center on quantifiable outcomes, using real figures to 
highlight the value you contributed to the company. List any vital lessons 
or skills learned through the development.

Here's a sample answer that you can use in job interviews:

The restructuring of our marketing team led to vast improvements in the 
way we executed marketing campaigns. For example, we've applied our 
critical learnings in digital marketing strategy in the US to Spain, where 
the market for ESPs was less saturated and less mature.

After six months, Spain had a 500% growth in organic search traffic due to 
the high-volume, low competition keywords in Spanish, compared to English. 
Outside digital, we've also participated in more marketing campaigns 
across France. One French event led to sales closing five enterprise deals 
valued at $25,000 and more.

Suffice to say, we've not only learned how to work better as a team, but 
we've also figured out how to better collaborate with other teams in the 
company. The company went from experiencing a loss in the previous year to 
a 20% profit in 20XX.

This answer is quite comprehensive, but you don't need to include 
everything in your resume. Focus on using a snippet or two in this 
section. Notice that the bolded bits have numbers and figures to 
demonstrate this success.
Making Your STAR Answers Resume-Friendly

Turn your answers into bullet points that can neatly fit within your 
resume. Your entry might look something like this:

Mailjet - Head of marketing operations (EMEA and USA) (June 2015 - July 
2019)

    Led effort to align global marketing initiatives and business 
development goals
    Restructured marketing communication workflows, liaised with product 
and sales teams, built upon previous successes in local regions, and set 
up best practices for better collaboration
    Efforts led to 20% increased profit, 500% growth in Spain's SEO 
efforts, and increased enterprise deals at $25,000 and more in France.

If you want to make this even more succinct:

Mailjet - Head of marketing operations (EMEA and USA) (June 2015 - July 
2019)

    Aligned global marketing initiatives alongside business and sales 
objectives and set up best practices across all regions to drastically 
improve our localized campaigns; yearly profits improved by 20%, 500% SEO 
growth in Spain, helped close more enterprise deals at $25,000 and more in 
France.

This concise summary includes all the necessary details from your STAR 
statements. But you need to understand that getting into this one bullet 
point requires a lot of elaboration and clarity on what to include. 
Therefore, before you try to summarize your feats, make sure that they are 
clear to yourself, first and foremost.
Benefits Of Using The STAR Method in Resumes

Employing the STAR technique in a resume enables you to share the scope of 
your qualifications and skills quickly. Below are some benefits of 
adopting the STAR method in your resume.

    Shows your value: A potential employer's primary goal is to determine 
how you will bring value to the firm when they hire you. When you use the 
STAR method in your resume, you can reveal your value more explicitly.
    Presents more detail: Using the STAR approach improves the obscure 
skill descriptions of a bulleted list into an actual example of how you 
acquired and applied a vital skill.
    Allows talking points: Drafting your STAR answers gives a clearer idea 
of effectively answering behavioral interview questions.
    Narrates a story: The STAR method permits you to explain how your work 
experience has formed who you are and how you've been successful in your 
experience.
    Creates a compelling resume relevant to the job requirements: By 
applying this method, you can adapt your STAR responses to meet an 
employer's job description. The STAR framework helps show you're equipped 
with the skills to get the job and makes your resume more interesting to 
read.

Negotiate A Higher Job Offer Salary With Levels.fyi

As a candidate, you want to increase your chances of getting the job by 
making your resume relevant to the job listing and answering interview 
questions in advance about your previous job experiences.

The STAR method applied to resumes can be a powerful way to catch the 
recruiter's attention. By placing your accomplishments within a 
fleshed-out context, you're making yourself an attractive, highly 
ambitious, and well-rounded candidate.

But, of course, crafting a compelling resume and acing your job interview 
is only one part of the process. If you need negotiating help to get a 
higher-paid job offer, Levels.fyi has a team of experienced recruiters to 
help you evaluate and negotiate higher job offers.

The STAR method is a highly effective technique for showcasing 
accomplishments on your resume.

We’ll show you how to master the STAR method and use it to create a 
compelling resume.
Build My Resume

Our free-to-use resume builder can make you a resume in as little as 5 
minutes. Pick the template you want, and our software will format 
everything for you.
What is the STAR method?

The STAR method uses your work history and qualifications to create 
concrete examples of times when you exceeded expectations.
Infographic showing a guide to the the STAR Method Resume: Situation, 
Task, Action, Result	

A STAR method resume contains work experience bullet points that answer 
the following questions:

    Situation: What situation or challenge did you face?
    Task: What task were you involved in? What were your responsibilities 
and goals?
    Action: What actions did you specifically take to achieve the task? 
How did you contribute to your team’s efforts?
    Result: What was the outcome of your actions? How did it benefit your 
company? Can it be quantified?

STAR statements can be a single bullet point, or multiple bullet points. 
These bullet points don’t need to be in order.

Let’s take a look at two examples:
Single STAR bullet point

Successfully spearheaded a team initiative (S) to boost customer 
satisfaction ratings by 20% (T) through research-driven problem solving, 
cross-functional collaboration, and strategic action planning (A), 
resulting in enhanced brand reputation and fostering customer loyalty (R)

In some instances, Situation and Task can be categorized together.
Multiple STAR bullet points (for one job experience)

    Managed inventory for a high-volume retail store, ensuring adequate 
stock levels to meet customer demand while minimizing excess inventory 
costs (S/T)
    Implemented an automated inventory tracking system and collaborated 
with vendors to streamline procurement processes (A)
    Reduced out-of-stock incidents by 30% and decreased excess inventory 
by 20% (R)

By providing detailed insight into your previous job duties and turning 
them into practical examples, you give the hiring manager a clear picture 
of your accomplishments.

In addition to using the STAR method on your resume, you can apply it to 
interviews, like in the video below.

Why should I use the STAR method on my resume?

There are many benefits to using the STAR method for your resume. 
Employers generally look for evidence of these three things when vetting 
candidates:

    a solid understanding of your own job qualifications and work history
    specific, practical experiences that are relevant to the role you’re 
applying for
    your ability to communicate your value concisely and confidently

A STAR statement achieves all of these goals and proves that you have the 
skills and knowledge needed for the position.

Additionally, it gives you an advantage over generic resumes because it 
shows you put time and effort into personalizing your application.

The STAR method interview framework is an excellent tool for answering 
behavioral interview questions and highlighting your career background.
How do I create a resume using the STAR method?

To create a STAR method resume, write accomplishment-oriented statements 
that are relevant to your application.

Here’s how to use the STAR method when you write your work experience 
section:
1. Study the job description carefully for the position you want

Look for resume keywords that describe the qualities, experiences, and 
skills the employer wants. This will give you a good idea of what kind of 
challenges you might face at your new job.

Then, create a list of the abilities and experiences that match your own.
2. Write down what you accomplished in your previous jobs

Writing down accomplishments from your career will make it easier to 
create STAR bullet points once you start writing your resume. Don’t forget 
to use hard numbers when describing your achievements. Hard numbers 
command attention and provide specifics about your resume achievements.

Compare these two examples:

Good example

    Crafted 15+ high-quality financial performance reports analyzing 
quarterly revenue trends, cost breakdowns, and profitability metrics for 
C-suite presentations

Bad example

    Wrote high-quality reports

The first example is much more impactful than the second because it 
provides more details about the achievement in question.
3. Write your bullet points

Go through your list of accomplishments and pick out ones that showcase 
the qualities and experiences you listed in step one.

Once you have three to five achievements for each job role on your resume, 
start putting them into bullet point format according to the STAR method.

After you’re done, here’s what a job entry on your resume could look like 
if you were a recent graduate:

Here are our finished STAR bullet points for a recent graduate:
STAR bullet points - Recent graduate

    Researched and segment 100+ leads (S/T), streamlining follow-ups with 
HubSpot (A) to increase the sales pipeline by 15% (R)
    Crafted personalized email campaigns (S/T) using CRM tools and 
leveraging analytics to target prospects effectively (A), which boosted 
client response rates by 12% in two months (R)
    Analyzed market trends for a startup project (S/T), presenting 
findings (A) that led to the launch of two new services and a 10% increase 
in customer acquisition (R)

Here’s a second STAR method example showing how an experienced job 
applicant would write their STAR statements:
STAR bullet points - Experienced applicant

    Revamped the employee onboarding process for a 500-person organization 
(S/T), introducing a digital orientation platform (A) which improved new 
hire satisfaction scores by 18% (R)
    Led a cross-functional team (S) to implement a company-wide 
performance review system (T), training 50 managers on best practices (A) 
to achieve a 22% increase in employee engagement scores within one year 
(R)
    Developed and executed a talent acquisition strategy for hard-to-fill 
roles in a competitive market (S/T), utilizing data-driven sourcing 
techniques and targeted employer branding campaigns (A), successfully 
reducing time-to-hire by 20% and increasing offer acceptance rates by 15% 
(R)

When writing your STAR method resume, remember to use the active voice 
instead of passive voice.

“Successfully hired and onboarded 50+ employees” sounds more impressive 
and dynamic than “50+ employees were successfully hired and onboarded”.

If you’re still unsure how to use the STAR method, check out 
industry-specific resume samples to get an idea of how to present your 
accomplishments properly.

You can also try using our pre-formatted resume templates to save time, or 
have a look through our resume tips so you can get to work on perfecting 
your STAR statements and writing a memorable resume.The STAR method is a 
highly effective technique for showcasing accomplishments on your resume.

We’ll show you how to master the STAR method and use it to create a 
compelling resume.
Build My Resume

Our free-to-use resume builder can make you a resume in as little as 5 
minutes. Pick the template you want, and our software will format 
everything for you.
What is the STAR method?

The STAR method uses your work history and qualifications to create 
concrete examples of times when you exceeded expectations.
Infographic showing a guide to the the STAR Method Resume: Situation, 
Task, Action, Result	

A STAR method resume contains work experience bullet points that answer 
the following questions:

    Situation: What situation or challenge did you face?
    Task: What task were you involved in? What were your responsibilities 
and goals?
    Action: What actions did you specifically take to achieve the task? 
How did you contribute to your team’s efforts?
    Result: What was the outcome of your actions? How did it benefit your 
company? Can it be quantified?

STAR statements can be a single bullet point, or multiple bullet points. 
These bullet points don’t need to be in order.

Let’s take a look at two examples:
Single STAR bullet point

Successfully spearheaded a team initiative (S) to boost customer 
satisfaction ratings by 20% (T) through research-driven problem solving, 
cross-functional collaboration, and strategic action planning (A), 
resulting in enhanced brand reputation and fostering customer loyalty (R)

In some instances, Situation and Task can be categorized together.
Multiple STAR bullet points (for one job experience)

    Managed inventory for a high-volume retail store, ensuring adequate 
stock levels to meet customer demand while minimizing excess inventory 
costs (S/T)
    Implemented an automated inventory tracking system and collaborated 
with vendors to streamline procurement processes (A)
    Reduced out-of-stock incidents by 30% and decreased excess inventory 
by 20% (R)

By providing detailed insight into your previous job duties and turning 
them into practical examples, you give the hiring manager a clear picture 
of your accomplishments.

In addition to using the STAR method on your resume, you can apply it to 
interviews, like in the video below.

Why should I use the STAR method on my resume?

There are many benefits to using the STAR method for your resume. 
Employers generally look for evidence of these three things when vetting 
candidates:

    a solid understanding of your own job qualifications and work history
    specific, practical experiences that are relevant to the role you’re 
applying for
    your ability to communicate your value concisely and confidently

A STAR statement achieves all of these goals and proves that you have the 
skills and knowledge needed for the position.

Additionally, it gives you an advantage over generic resumes because it 
shows you put time and effort into personalizing your application.

The STAR method interview framework is an excellent tool for answering 
behavioral interview questions and highlighting your career background.
How do I create a resume using the STAR method?

To create a STAR method resume, write accomplishment-oriented statements 
that are relevant to your application.

Here’s how to use the STAR method when you write your work experience 
section:
1. Study the job description carefully for the position you want

Look for resume keywords that describe the qualities, experiences, and 
skills the employer wants. This will give you a good idea of what kind of 
challenges you might face at your new job.

Then, create a list of the abilities and experiences that match your own.
2. Write down what you accomplished in your previous jobs

Writing down accomplishments from your career will make it easier to 
create STAR bullet points once you start writing your resume. Don’t forget 
to use hard numbers when describing your achievements. Hard numbers 
command attention and provide specifics about your resume achievements.

Compare these two examples:

Good example

    Crafted 15+ high-quality financial performance reports analyzing 
quarterly revenue trends, cost breakdowns, and profitability metrics for 
C-suite presentations

Bad example

    Wrote high-quality reports

The first example is much more impactful than the second because it 
provides more details about the achievement in question.
3. Write your bullet points

Go through your list of accomplishments and pick out ones that showcase 
the qualities and experiences you listed in step one.

Once you have three to five achievements for each job role on your resume, 
start putting them into bullet point format according to the STAR method.

After you’re done, here’s what a job entry on your resume could look like 
if you were a recent graduate:

Here are our finished STAR bullet points for a recent graduate:
STAR bullet points - Recent graduate

    Researched and segment 100+ leads (S/T), streamlining follow-ups with 
HubSpot (A) to increase the sales pipeline by 15% (R)
    Crafted personalized email campaigns (S/T) using CRM tools and 
leveraging analytics to target prospects effectively (A), which boosted 
client response rates by 12% in two months (R)
    Analyzed market trends for a startup project (S/T), presenting 
findings (A) that led to the launch of two new services and a 10% increase 
in customer acquisition (R)

Here’s a second STAR method example showing how an experienced job 
applicant would write their STAR statements:
STAR bullet points - Experienced applicant

    Revamped the employee onboarding process for a 500-person organization 
(S/T), introducing a digital orientation platform (A) which improved new 
hire satisfaction scores by 18% (R)
    Led a cross-functional team (S) to implement a company-wide 
performance review system (T), training 50 managers on best practices (A) 
to achieve a 22% increase in employee engagement scores within one year 
(R)
    Developed and executed a talent acquisition strategy for hard-to-fill 
roles in a competitive market (S/T), utilizing data-driven sourcing 
techniques and targeted employer branding campaigns (A), successfully 
reducing time-to-hire by 20% and increasing offer acceptance rates by 15% 
(R)

When writing your STAR method resume, remember to use the active voice 
instead of passive voice.

“Successfully hired and onboarded 50+ employees” sounds more impressive 
and dynamic than “50+ employees were successfully hired and onboarded”.

If you’re still unsure how to use the STAR method, check out 
industry-specific resume samples to get an idea of how to present your 
accomplishments properly.

You can also try using our pre-formatted resume templates to save time, or 
have a look through our resume tips so you can get to work on perfecting 
your STAR statements and writing a memorable resume.
