

There is so much confusion about ATSs. Every single day 
recruiters try to explain the inner workings, with 
varying degrees of success. As one of those, I’m so tired 
of repeating myself! Instead, I’m writing this handy 
little cheat sheet so I have something to sprinkle all 
over the internet like common sense confetti whenever 
this issue comes up.

ATS? It’s in the name.

ATS stands for Applicant Tracking System. It’s a System 
that Tracks Applicants. That’s it. That’s the acronym. 
Not “automated”, not “ATS system”, or any of the other 
wild definitions people come up with. Applicant. 
Tracking. System.

THE ATS?

Well, which one? Seriously there are over 200 companies 
who currently have some kind of ATS on the market. Some 
are highly customizable and targeted to large companies, 
like Taleo Enterprise Edition. Others are free for 
smaller start ups or sole proprietors, like Breezy HR. 
The specific ATS a company may use is based on lots of 
variables, including cost, number of users, and features. 
The way an ATS is CONFIGURED can also vary widely – I’ve 
personally used a few of the same systems at different 
companies and had to learn all over because the 
implementation was so different.

So What’s An ATS For Anyway?

Exactly what it sounds like! A system to track 
applicants. Seems simple enough, but many ATSs do that 
and more – before we get into details, let’s review the 
general life cycle of hiring:

Role Created –> Inbound Applicants/Sourced Candidates –> 
Interviews –> Offers Created/Extended/Accepted or 
Declined

I recently created a 5 video playlist that explains these 
steps in further detail – what many job seekers find most 
surprising is how much “OTHER” stuff we do in our ATSs, 
that is above and beyond reviewing resumes. Check it out 
HERE.


At each step of the process, the ATS is used to document 
everything. Here’s a non-exhaustive list of the actions 
recruiters might take any given day:

Open new requisitions. These are the job postings that 
are published on a company career page, and possibly 
other places too. Many companies integrate with LinkedIn, 
or Indeed, or other web scrapers that might re-share a 
job post. Opening new roles may be complex themselves – 
with multiple approvers, checks and balances for 
compliance, and other steps before it even makes it to 
the internet. All activity tied to that requisition is 
easily viewed/filtered for reporting purposes. With few 
exceptions, hiring doesn’t happen without a verified 
business need / approved headcount / open role (so much 
for the old hidden job market, huh?)

Review incoming applicants. This is the step that gets 
talked about the most. Interestingly, it’s the part I 
spend the least amount of time doing when I’m in the ATS. 
This IS an important step of course, but far from the 
ONLY purpose of the ATS. Reviewing applicants is usually 
highly manual, with recruiters quickly reviewing large 
number of resumes or applications at once against certain 
criteria (usually Basic Qualifications). Successful 
applicants are usually forwarded to a business reviewer 
(typically the Hiring Manager or a delegate) for a second 
look. SOME systems will utilize “knock out” questions – 
these are typically “yes/no” decision tree type 
questions, tied to basic qualifications. For example, an 
application question could be “are you eligible to work 
in the US without sponsorship?” If you answer NO, you 
will be automatically dispositioned from the position. 
Basically that means you’re now in “rejected” status. Fun 
fact, most ATSs (all I’ve used) have a status, and it’s 
“rejected”. You’re still attached to the requisition. You 
never LEAVE the requisition. You are there, forever, in 
“rejected” status.

Add sourced candidates. Sometimes this happens in a CRM 
that “talks” to the ATS. Some systems (especially for 
compliance purposes) require a prospect to apply. 
Recruiters can send that invite to apply directly from 
their CRM/ATS to help streamline the process of getting 
their candidate attached to the requisition for hiring 
manager review and future activity

The interview process. Recruiters request review. Hiring 
managers request an interview. Coordinators schedule 
interviews and create feedback links. ALL of this 
typically happens within the ATS. Some notes are 
automatic: “submitted to Joe Smith for resume review” 
Others are typed out: “called CANDIDATE to discuss 
interview prep materials and confirmed schedule. Also 
discussed comp expectations of $X, candidate anticipating 
competing offer by date”. These entries are typically 
time/date stamped which is very helpful when reviewing 
previous history for a candidate.

Offers. Offers are created, extended and recorded in the 
ATS. Negotiations, approvals, all the back and forth that 
happens during offers is typically done in this system. 
It creates not only the required paper trail, but also 
generates the official documents that can then be emailed 
or delivered via a dedicated candidate portal.

General Documentation / Search. Y’all. Every time I have 
a conversation with a prospective candidate I should be 
writing it down. I’m not always great at this, but the 
expectation / general rules around this is DOCUMENT 
EVERYTHING. We have a saying in recruiting – if it’s not 
in the ATS, it didn’t happen. Track. It. All. Smart 
recruiters will also START new searches in our database – 
previous candidates, silver medalists on similar roles, 
former referrals… ATSs are a literal goldmine of passive 
talent that at some point, were interested in your 
company. Why would you NOT search for and try to reengage 
those folks?

But What About…?

Knockout questions! Yes – SOME systems are enabled with a 
yes/no decision tree, as I mentioned above.

Ranking! Sure, some ATSs will apply a “match” score – 
typically a percentage. I have personally used ONE 
version of ONE ATS that had this ranking (Taleo) and it 
was awful. 100% matches were basically keyword stuffed 
nightmares and we regularly hired 20-40% matches because 
we would actually review the resumes to decide for 
ourselves. Absolute trash and I hate these. If there’s a 
good one out there, I haven’t used it.

3 am rejections! Too fast, random, or middle of the night 
updates are almost always a result of one of two things – 
knockout questions, OR a role that is no longer accepting 
applications. Ideally a role is REMOVED from the career 
site when it’s got an offer extended or even accepted. 
But systems fail, or recruiters forget to hit a button – 
things happen and while it sucks for the job seeker, it’s 
hardly “proof” of a bot. Some systems are set up to send 
a disposition email 12 hours after being rejected, so 
maybe the recruiter reviewed yours at 3 pm! OR, maybe 
they’re actually working at 3 am. In another time zone. 
Perhaps they’re simply a night owl – I’ve definitely 
pulled some weird hours during the only quiet time I have 
to get things done!

But my friend/career coach/resume writer/LinkedIn 
influencer said! Sure they did! And I bet they believe 
it. I don’t necessarily think anyone is INTENTIONALLY 
lying about how ATSs work to make a buck… well maybe a 
couple of people I won’t name here. But generally 
speaking, I think the folks spreading this misinformation 
actually believe it – which is kind of heart breaking 
when there’s so much actual data to the contrary. My best 
advice to any job seeker who is worried about finding 
“the truth”, is to go straight to the source. I talk a 
bit about questions you can ask in this LinkedIn post. 
Don’t even listen to ME – listen to the recruiters at the 
companies you want to work at! They know best.

Additional Resources

Many recruiters have talked about this topic until we’re 
blue in the face. Some of my fave links (including my 
own!) included here:

Marc Cenedella / Nate Smith, CEO of Lever – Secrets Of 
The ATS is an in-depth conversation between Marc (CEO of 
The Ladders) and Nate where they discuss some of the 
common fallacies around ATSs. Lever is a very popular and 
well-liked by recruiters system.

Dominic Joyce, Founder of CV Upgrade – Dominic has a 
great video that walks through step by step how a 
recruiter navigates their ATS platform. At 5 minutes 
long, it’s a quick yet thorough tour through a commonly 
used ATS. Check it out HERE

Kristen Fife, Senior Technical Recruiter – Kristen is a 
well respected and tenured recruiter in the Seattle 
market who’s been in the industry since we were accepting 
paper applications. Her article on the ATS, Keywords, and 
Knockout Questions is a deep dive into common processes 
in US companies. Find it HERE

Christine Assaf, Human Resources Consultant – Christine 
wrote one of the best pieces I’ve ever read on the “75% 
of resumes aren’t seen by a human” myth. Essentially, 
there is no actual PROOF that this is accurate – yet 
people share it constantly like we’ve actually seen this 
happen in the wild… Reader, we have not. Check out her 
AMAZING breakdown HERE

Yvonne Robinson-Jackson, Executive Career Coach – In this 
nearly hour long video, Yvonne does a DEEEEEP dive into 
the ATS. Check out this video for more insights into the 
backend of these various tools/processes, including some 
screenshots from Bullhorn, a common system. Find it HERE

Amy Miller, hey that’s me! 🙂 – honestly y’all I’m so 
tired of talking about this. That’s why I wrote this 
post, and am putting all my content in one place!! 
Starting with The Truth About The ATS Playlist – NINE 
videos where I break down different topics covering 
everything from applications to boolean searches.

There are lots of amazing professionals out there sharing 
their knowledge – I’ll update this post regularly with 
new links/content as I come across it.

Ok Fine. But Why Do You Care, Amy?

Y’all I wish I didn’t some days 😉 It is exhausting 
having this conversation over and over again – BUT – I 
started this blog and channel BECAUSE I want better for 
those who need support. I had to learn so many things 
about my career and job search the hard way. Now that I 
am in a position to share my expertise, I will shout it 
as long and loud as possible so other job seekers don’t 
struggle through the same uncertainties and frustration I 
did. I have helped thousands of job seekers through one 
on one coaching and more recently, scaling my YouTube 
channel and blog – this is the same advice I have given 
my adult children, who have successfully navigated their 
own early career challenges.

If you’re reading this, I want the same success for you. 
There are many things job seekers should spend time on 
when seeking their next role – worrying about the 
imaginary ATS bot isn’t one of them.

